---
title: 'NATURE OF PHYSICAL WORLD  AND MEASUREMENT'
weight: 1
---

**1.1**

**Learning Objectives**

**In this unit, the student is exposed to** • excitement generated by the discoveries in Phy • an understanding of physical quantities of imp • different system of units • an understanding of errors and corrections in • the importance of significant figures • usage of dimensions to check the homogeneity

**SCIENCE—INTRODUCTION**

The word ‘science’ has its root in the Latin verb **_scientia_**, meaning **_“to know”_**. In Tamil language, it is ‘அறிவியல்’ (Ariviyal) meaning ‘knowing the truth’. The human mind is always curious to know and understand different phenomena like the bright celestial objects in nature, cyclic changes in the seasons, occurrence of rainbow, etc. The inquisitive mind looks for meaningful patterns and relations in such phenomena. Today’s modern science and technology is an offshoot of the understanding of nature. Science is the systematic organization of knowledge gained through observation, experimentation and logical reasoning. The knowledge of science dealing with non-living things is physical science





_“Education is not the learning of facts, but t_  

sics ortance

physics measurements

of physical quantities

OF PHYSICAL WORLD ASUREMENT

_he training of the mind to think” –_ **Albert Einstein**

(Physics and Chemistry), and that dealing with living things is biological science (Botany, Zoology etc.).

Curiosity-driven observations of natural happenings was the origin of science. The word ‘science’ was coined only in the 19th century. Natural philosophy was the earlier name given to science, when ancient civilization knew and practised astronomy, chemistry, human physiology and agriculture. Oral communication was the mode of conveying knowledge when writing systems were not yet developed. One of the oldest forerunners of scientific advancements, from astronomy to medicine, were the Egyptians. Scientific and mathematical excellence in India dates back to prehistoric human activity in the Indus Valley Civilization (3300 – 1300 BC(BCE).




  

## The Scientific Method


The scientific method is a step-by-step approach in studying natural phenomena and establishing laws which govern these phenomena. Any scientific method involves the following general features.

(i) Systematic observation (ii) Controlled experimentation (iii) Qualitative and quantitative reasoning (iv) Mathematical modeling (v) Prediction and verification or

falsification of theories

**Example** Consider a metalic rod being heated. When one end of the rod is heated, heat is felt at the other end. The following questions can be asked on this observation

a) What happens within the rod when it is heated?

b) How does the heat reach the other end?

c) Is this effect true for all materials? d) If heat flows through the material, is it

possible to visualize heat?

The process of finding the answers to these queries is scientific investigation.

The basic phenomenon of heat is discussed in unit 8.

According to part IV Article 51A (h) of Indian Constitution _“It shall be the duty of every citizen of India to develop scientific temper, humanism and spirit of inquiry and reform’’. This is the aim of_ our Science Education.  

**1.2**

The name Physics was introduced by Aristotle in the year 350 BC

**PHYSICS - INTRODUCTION**

The word ‘physics’ is derived from the Greek word “Fusis”, meaning nature. The study of nature and natural phenomena is dealt within physics. Hence physics is considered as the most basic of all sciences.

**_Unification and Reductionism are_** the two approaches in studying physics. Attempting to explain diverse physical phenomena with a few concepts and laws is unification. For example, Newton’s universal law of gravitation (in unit 6) explains the motion of freely falling bodies towards the Earth, motion of planets around the Sun, motion of the Moon around the Earth, thus unifying the fundamental forces of nature.

An attempt to explain a macroscopic system in terms of its microscopic constituents is **_reductionism_**. For example, thermodynamics (unit 8) was developed to explain macroscopic properties like temperature, entropy, etc., of bulk systems. The above properties have been interpreted in terms of the molecular constituents (microscopic) of the bulk system by kinetic theory (unit 9) and statistical mechanics.






| e n ame P hysics was in troduced b y Aristotle  in t he  year 350 B C |
|------|------|

  

## Branches of Physics


Physics as a fundamental science helps to uncover the laws of nature. The language of its expression is mathematics. In ancient times, humans lived with nature – their lifestyles were integrated with nature. They could understand the signals from the movement of the stars and other celestial bodies. They could determine the time to sow and reap by watching the sky. Thus, astronomy and mathematics were the first disciplines to be developed. The chronological development of various branches of physics is presented in Appendix A1.1. The various branches of physics are schematically shown in figure 1.1. The essential focus of different areas is given in Table 1.1.

**Figure 1.1** Branches of Physics

Classical

Mechanics

Thermodynamics & Kinetic Theory of Gases

Optics

Electricity & Magnetism

Acoustics

Astrophysics

Relativity

Statics

Physics

Dynamics  

Some of the fundamental concepts of basic areas of physics are discussed in higher secondary first year physics books volume 1 and 2. Mechanics is covered in unit 1 to 6. Unit 1 gives an idea of the development of physics along with discussion on basic elements such as measurement, units etc. Unit 2 gives the basic mathematics needed to express the impact of physical principles and their governing laws. The impact of forces acting on objects in terms of the fundamental laws of motion of Newton are very systematically covered in unit 3. Work and energy which are the basic parameters of investigation of the mechanical world are presented in unit 4. Unit 5 deals with the mechanics of rigid bodies (in contrast, objects are viewed as point objects in units

Modern

Quantum Physics Non-relativistic

Relativistic

Atomic Physics

Nuclear Physics

Molecular Physics

High Energy Physics

Condensed Matter Physics

Kinematics

Kinetics







|------|------|------|------|

| StaticsMechanicsDynamicsThermodynamics &Kinetic Theory of GasesOpticsElectricity & MagnetismAcoustics |ModernKinematicsKinetics |











|------|






  

**Table 1.1** Branches of Physics

**Classical Physics** Refers to traditio developed **befor**

**Branch Major focus** 1\. Classical mechanics The study of forc

motion 2. Thermodynamics The study of the

of energy 3. Optics The study of ligh 4. Electricity and

magnetism The study of elec relationship

5\. Acoustics The study of the 6. Astrophysics The branch of ph

physics of astron 7. Relativity One of the branc

the relationship b with respect to o

**Modern Physics** Refers to the con the beginning of

1\. \*Quantum mechanics The study of the and subatomic le

2\. Atomic physics The branch of ph properties of the

3\. Nuclear physics The branch of ph properties and re

4\. Condensed matter physics

The study of the liquids and those gas). It branches developing fields It covers the basi developing new m applications.

5\. High energy physics The study of the \*Quantum mechanics is a broader approach; classical r Detailed explanation is beyond the scope of this book.

3 and 4). The basics of gravitation and its consequences are discussed in unit 6. Older branches of physics such as different properties of matter are discussed in unit 7.  

nal physics that was recognized and **e the beginning of the 20**th **century**

es acting on bodies whether at rest or in

relationship between heat and other forms

t tricity and magnetism and their mutual

production and propagation of sound waves ysics which deals with the study of the omical bodies hes of theoretical physics which deals with etween space, time and energy particularly

bjects moving in different ways .

cepts in physics that have surfaced since the 20th century. discrete nature of phenomena at the atomic vels ysics which deals with the structure and atom ysics which deals with the structure, action of the nuclei of atoms. properties of condensed materials (solids, intermediate between them and dense into various sub-divisions including such as nano science, photonics etc. cs of materials science, which aims at

aterial with better properties for promising

nature of the particles. esults can be reproduced in quantum mechanics also.

The impact of heat and investigations of its consequences are covered in units 8 and 9. Important features of oscillations and wave motion are covered in units 10 and 11.




  

## Scope and Excitement of Physics


Discoveries in physics are of two types; accidental discoveries and well-analysed research outcome in the laboratory based on intuitive thinking and prediction. For example, magnetism was accidentally observed but the reason for this strange behavior of magnets was later analysed theoretically. This analysis revealed the underlying phenomena of magnetism. With this knowledge, artificial magnets were prepared in the laboratories. Theoretical predictions are the most important contribution of physics to the developments in technology and medicine. For example, the famous equation of Albert Einstein, E=mc2 was a theoretical prediction in 1905 and experimentally proved in 1932 by Cockcroft and Walton. Theoretical predictions aided with recent simulation and computation procedures are widely used to identify the most suited materials for robust applications. The pharmaceutical industry uses this technique very effectively to design new drugs. Biocompatible materials for organ replacement are predicted using quantum prescriptions of physics before fabrication. Thus, experiments and theory work hand in hand complimenting one another.

Physics has a huge scope as it covers a tremendous range of magnitude of various physical quantities (length, mass, time, energy etc). It deals with systems of very large magnitude as in astronomical phenomena as well as those with very small magnitude involving electrons and protons.

„ Range of time scales: astronomical scales to microscopic scales, 1018s to 10−22s.  

„ Range of masses: from heavenly bodies to electron, 1055 kg (mass of known observable universe) to 10−31 kg (mass of an electron) \[the actual mass of an electron is 9.11×10–31 kg\].

The study of physics is not only educative but also exciting in many ways.

„ A small number of basic concepts and laws can explain diverse physical phenomena.

„ The most interesting part is the designing of useful devices based on the physical laws.

For example i) use of robotics ii) journey to Moon and to nearby planets with controls from the ground iii) technological advances in health sciences etc.

„ Carrying out new challenging experiments to unfold the secrets of nature and in verifying or falsifying the existing theories.

„ Probing and understanding the science behind natural phenomena like the eclipse, and why one feels the heat when there is a fire? (or) What causes the wind, etc.

In today’s world of technological advancement, the building block of all engineering and technical education is physics which is explained with the help of mathematical tools.




  

# PHYSICS IN RELATION TO TECHNOLOGY AND SOCIETY


Technology is the application of the principles of physics for practical purposes. The application of knowledge for practical purposes in various fields to invent and produce useful products or to solve problems is known as technology. Thus, physics and technology can both together impact our society directly or indirectly. For example,

i. Basic laws of electricity and magnetism led to the discovery of wireless communication technology which has shrunk the world with effective communication over large distances.

ii. The launching of satellite into space has revolutionized the concept of communication.

iii. Microelectronics, lasers, computers, superconductivity and nuclear energy have comprehensively changed the thinking and living style of human beings.

Physics being a fundamental science has played a vital role in the development of all other sciences. A few examples:

1\. **Physics in relation to Chemistry:** In physics, we study the structure of atom, radioactivity, X-ray diffraction etc. Such studies have enabled researchers in chemistry to arrange elements in the periodic table on the basis of their atomic numbers. This has further helped to know the nature of valency, chemical  

bonding and to understand the complex chemical structures. Inter-disciplinary branches like Physical chemistry and Quantum chemistry play important roles here.

2\. **Physics in relation to biology:** Biological studies are impossible without a microscope designed using physics principles. The invention of the electron microscope has made it possible to see even the structure of a cell. X-ray and neutron diffraction techniques have helped us to understand the structure of nucleic acids, which help to control vital life processes. X-rays are used for diagnostic purposes. Radio-isotopes are used in radiotherapy for the cure of cancer and other diseases. In recent years, biological processes are being studied from the physics point of view.

3\. **Physics in relation to mathematics:** Physics is a quantitative science. It is most closely related to mathematics as a tool for its development.

4\. **Physics in relation to astronomy:** Astronomical telescopes are used to study the motion of planets and other heavenly bodies in the sky. Radio telescopes have enabled the astronomers to observe distant points of the universe. Studies of the universe are done using physical principles.

5\. **Physics in relation to geology:** Diffraction techniques help to study the crystal structure of various rocks. Radioactivity is used to estimate the age of rocks, fossils and the age of the Earth.

6\. **Physics in relation to oceanography:** Oceanographers seek to understand the physical and chemical processes of the




  

**1.4**

oceans. They measure parameters such as temperature, salinity, current speed, gas fluxes, chemical components.

7\. **Physics in relation to psychology:** All psychological interactions can be derived from a physical process. The movements of neurotransmitters are governed by the physical properties of diffusion and molecular motion. The functioning of our brain is related to our underlying wave- particle dualism.

Nature teaches true science with physics as an efficient tool. Science and technology should be used in a balanced manner so that they do not become weapons to destroy nature which taught us science. Global warming and other negative impacts of technology need to be checked. Safe science with moderate and appropriate use of technology is the need of this century.

The scope and opportunities for higher education in physics and various fellowships offered is given in the beginning of the book.

**MEASUREMENT**

_“When you can measure what you are speaking about and can express it in numbers, you know something about it; but when you cannot express it in numbers, your knowledge is of a meager and unsatisfactory kind”_ \- **Lord Kelvin**  

The comparison of any physical quantity with its standard unit is known as measurement.

Measurement is the basis of all scientific studies and experimentation. It plays an important role in our daily life. Physics is a quantitative science and physicists always deal with numbers which are the measurement of physical quantities.

## Definition of Physical Quantity


Quantities that can be measured, and in terms of which, laws of physics are described are called physical quantities. Examples are length, mass, time, force, energy, etc.

## Types of Physical Quantities


Physical quantities are classified into two types. They are fundamental and derived quantities.

_Fundamental or base quantities are quantities which cannot be expressed in terms of any other physical quantities. These_ are length, mass, time, electric current, temperature, luminous intensity and amount of substance.

_Quantities that can be expressed in terms of fundamental quantities are called derived quantities._ For example, area, volume, velocity, acceleration, force, etc.




  

## Definition of Unit and its Types


The process of measurement is basically a process of comparison. To measure a quantity, we always compare it with some reference standard. For example, when we state that a rope is 10 meter long, it is to say that it is 10 times as long as an object whose length is defined as 1 metre. Such a standard is known as the unit of the quantity. Here 1 metre is the unit of the quantity ‘length’.

_An arbitrarily chosen standard of measurement of a quantity, which is accepted internationally is called unit of the quantity._

The units in which the fundamental quantities are measured are called _fundamental or base units_ and the units of measurement of all other physical quantities, which can be obtained by a suitable multiplication or division of powers of fundamental units, are called _derived units_.

## Different types of Measurement Systems


A complete set of units which is used to measure all kinds of fundamental and derived quantities is called a system of units. Here are the common system of units used in mechanics:

(a) **the f.p.s. system** is the British Engineering system of units, which uses **_foot_**, **_pound_** and **_second_** as the three basic units for measuring length, mass and time respectively.

(b) The c.g.s system is the Gaussian system, which uses **_centimeter, gram_**  

and **_second_** as the three basic units for measuring length, mass and time respectively.

(c) The m.k.s system is based on metre, **_kilogram_** and **_second_** as the three basic units for measuring length, mass and time respectively.

The cgs, mks and SI are metric or decimal system of units. The fps system is not a metric system.

## SI unit System


The system of units used by scientists and engineers around the world is commonly called **_the metric system_** but, since 1960, it has been known officially as the International System, or SI (the abbreviation for its French name, Système International). The SI with a standard scheme of symbols, units and abbreviations, were developed and recommended by the General Conference on Weights and Measures in 1971 for international usage in scientific, technical, industrial and commercial work. The advantages of the SI system are,

i) This system makes use of only one unit for one physical quantity, which means a rational system of units.

ii) In this system, all the derived units can be easily obtained from basic and supplementary units, which means it is a coherent system of units.




  

iii) It is a metric system which means that multiples and submultiples can be expressed as powers of 10.

In SI, there are seven fundamental units as given in Table 1.2

**Table 1.2** SI Base Quantities and Units

**Base Quantity Unit Symbol**

Length metre m One metre vacuum in

Mass kilogram kg One kilog of platinu its diamet Weights an

Time second s One secon radiation two hyper atom.(196

Electric current

ampere A One amp maintaine of infinite metre apa length of 2

Temperature kelvin K One kelvi

thermody the water

Amount of substance

mole mol One mole many elem of pure ca

Luminous intensity

candela cd One cande of a sour

frequency

of 1 683

wa

\* Triple point of water is the temperature at wh ice are all in equilibrium. The triple point tem  

FPO

**SI Units**

**Definition**

is the length of the path travelled by light in 1/299,792,458 of a second (1983) ram is the mass of the prototype cylinder m iridium alloy (whose height is equal to er), preserved at the International Bureau of d Measures at Serves, near Paris, France. (1901)

d is the duration of 9,192,631,770 periods of corresponding to the transition between the fine levels of the ground state of Cesium-133 7) ere is the constant current, which when d in each of the two straight parallel conductors length and negligible cross section, held one rt in vacuum shall produce a force per unit × 10−7 N/m between them. (1948)

n is the fraction 1 273 16.

 

 

of the

namic temperature of the triple point\* of . (1967) is the amount of substance which contains as entary entities as there are atoms in 0.012 kg

rbon-12. (1971) la is the luminous intensity in a given direction, ce that emits monochromatic radiation of

5.4 × 1014 Hz and that has a radiant intensity

tt/steradian in that direction. (1979)

ich saturated vapour, pure water and melting perature of water is 273.16K




  

**Table 1.3** Derived Quantities and their Un **Physical quantity Expression**

Plane angle arc / radius

Solid angle surface area/radiu

Area length × breadth

Volume area × height

Velocity displacement / tim

Acceleration velocity / time

Angular velocity angular displacem

Angular acceleration angular velocity /

Density mass / volume

Linear momentum mass × velocity

Moment of inertia mass × (distance)

Force mass × acceleratio

Pressure force / area

Energy (work) force × distance

Power Work / time

Impulse force × time

Surface tension force / length

Moment of force (torque) force × distance

Electric charge current × time

Current density current / area

Magnetic induction force / (current ×

Force constant force / displaceme

Plank’s constant energy of photon

Specific heat (S) heat energy / (ma

Boltzmann constant (_k_) energy/temperatu

Table 1.3 lists some of the derived quantities an  

its **Unit**

rad

s2 sr

m2

m3

e m s−1

m s−2

ent / time rad s−1

time rad s−2

kg m−3

kg m s−1

2 kg m2

n kg m s−2 or N

N m−2 or Pa

N m or J

J s−1 or watt (W)

N s

N m−1

N m

A s or C

A m−2

length) N A−1 m−1 or tesla

nt N m–1

/ frequency J s

ss × temperature) J kg–1 K–1

re J K–1

d their units.




  

**1.5**

Note: π radian = 180°

1 radian   

180 180 7 22

57 27 

.

Also, 1° (degree of arc) = 60′ (minute of arc) and 1′ (minute of arc) = 60″ (seconds of arc)

**MEASUREMENT OF BASIC QUANTITIES**

## Measurement of length


The concept of length in physics is related to the concept of distance in everyday life. Length is defined as the distance between any two points in space. The SI unit of length is metre. The objects of our interest vary widely in sizes. For example, large objects like the galaxy, stars, Sun, Earth, Moon etc., and their distances constitute a **_macrocosm_**. It refers to a large world,

**Relations between radian, degree and minutes:**

1° = π 180

rad = 1.744 × 10-2 rad

∴ = = =

≈

− −

−

1΄ 1 60

1 744 10 60

2 906 10

2 91 10

2 4

4

 . .

.

_rad_

_rad_

× ×

×

∴ = = = −

−1΄́ 1 3600

1 744 10 3600 ≈ 4.84 × 10-6 _rad_

4 844 10 2

6  . . _rad_×

×  

in which both objects and distances are large. On the contrary, objects like molecules, atoms, proton, neutron, electron, bacteria etc., and their distances constitute **_microcosm_**, which means a small world in which both objects and distances are small-sized.

Distances ranging from 10−5 m to 102 m can be measured by direct methods. For example_,_ a metre scale can be used to measure the distance from 10−3 m to 1

m, vernier calipers up to 10−4 m, a screw gauge up to 10−5 m and so on. The atomic and astronomical distances cannot be measured by any of the above mentioned direct methods. Hence, to measure the very small and the very large distances, indirect methods have to be devised and used. In Table 1.4, a list of powers of 10 (both positive and negative powers) is given. Prefixes for each power are also mentioned. These prefixes are used along with units of length, and of mass.

The supplementary quantities of plane and solid angle were converted into Derived quantities in 1995 (GCWM)

**The Radian (rad): One radian is the angle** _subtended at the centre of a circle by an arc equal in length to the radius of the circle_. **The Steradian (sr): One steradian is** _the solid angle subtended at the centre of a sphere, by that surface of the sphere, which is equal in area, to the square of radius of the sphere_




  

**Table 1.4 Prefixes for Powers of Ten** Multiple Prefix Symbol

101 deca da 102 hecto h 103 kilo k 106 mega M 109 giga G 1012 tera T 1015 peta P 1018 exa E 1021 zetta Z 1024 yotta Y

**i) Measurement of small distances: screw gauge and vernier caliper** _Screw gauge: The screw gauge is_ an instrument used for measuring accurately the dimensions of objects up to a maximum of about 50 mm. The principle of the instrument is the magnification of linear motion using

**Figure 1.2** Screw gauge and vernier caliper w

0

(a) No error (b) +ve error

(c) - ve error (d) screw gauge reading

A model reading PSR = 6 mm ; HSC=40 divisions; Reading = \[6mm+(40x0.01mm)\]=6.40mm

Screw Gauge

10

5

0 0

(a

Main

5

0

95

0

95

90

Pitch Scale 45

40

35

0

5

0

95

1050

0

0  

the circular motion of a screw. The least count of the screw gauge is 0.01 mm _Vernier caliper:_ A vernier caliper is a versatile instrument for measuring the dimensions of an object namely diameter of a hole, or a depth of a hole. The least count of the vernier caliper is 0.01 cm

Sub multiple Prefix Symbol 10−1 deci d 10−2 centi c 10−3 milli m 10−6 micro µ 10−9 nano n 10−12 pico p 10−15 femto f 10−18 atto a 10−21 zepto z 10−24 yocto y

ith errors

(d) Vernier reading A model reading MSR = 2.2 cm ; VSC = 4 divisions; Reading = \[2.2 cm+(4x0.01cm)\] = 2.24 cm

Vernier Caliper

(b) +ve error (c) - ve error) No error

Scale

Vernier Scale

1

5 10

0 1 2 3 4

0 5 10

0 1

0 5 10

0 1

0 5 10

+0.03 cm –0.06 cm

15 200 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8

0 5 10




  

**ii) Measurement of large distances** For measuring larger distances such as

the height of a tree, distance of the Moon or a planet from the Earth, some special methods are adopted. Triangulation method, parallax method and radar method are used to determine very large distances.

**Triangulation method for the height of an accessible object** Let AB = h be the height of the tree or tower to be measured. Let C be the point of observation at distance _x_ from B. Place a range finder at C and measure the angle of elevation, ∠ACB = θ as shown in Figure 1.3.

From right angled triangle ABC,

tanθ = =_AB BC_

_h x_

(or)

height h = _x_ tan θ

Knowing the distance _x_, the height h can be determined.

**Figure 1.3** Triangulation method

h

A

B_x_C

θ

Range and order of lengths of various objects are listed in Table 1.5  

**EXAMPLE 1.1**

From a point on the ground, the top of a tree is seen to have an angle of elevation 60°. The distance between the tree and a point is 50 m. Calculate the height of the tree?

**_Solution_**

Angle θ = 60°

The distance between the tree and a point _x_ \= 50 m

Height of the tree (h) = ?

For triangulation method tan θ = _h x_

h = _x_ tan θ = 50 × tan 60° = 50 × 1.732 _h_ = 86.6 m

The height of the tree is 86.6 m.

**Parallax method**

Very large distances, such as the distance of a planet or a star from the Earth can be measured by the parallax method. _Parallax is the name given to the apparent change in the position of an object with respect to the background, when the object is seen from two different positions. The distance between the_ two positions (i.e., points of observation) is called the basis (b). Consider any object at the location O (Figure 1.4)

Let L and R represent the positions of the left and right eyes of the observer respectively.

The object (O) is viewed with the left eye (L) keeping the right eye closed and the same object (O) is viewed with the right eye (R) keeping the left eye closed.




  

In Figure 1.4, LO and RO are the lines drawn from the positions of the left and right eyes to the object. These two lines make an angle θ at O. This angle θ is called the angle of parallax.

OL and OR are considered as the radii (_x_) of a circle. For astronomical calculation, the distance LR = b (basis) can be treated as an arc of this circle, then

OL = OR = _x_ as LR = b

θ= _b x_

Knowing b and θ, _x_ can be calculated which is approximately the distance of the object from the observer.

If the object is the Moon or any near by star, then the angle θ will be too small due to the large astronomical distance and the place of observation. In this case, the two points of observation should be sufficiently spaced on the surface of the Earth.

**Figure 1.4** Parallax method L Rb

_x x_

θ

O

**Determination of distance of Moon from Earth** In Figure 1.5, C is the centre of the Earth. A and B are two diametrically opposite  

places on the surface of the Earth. From A and B, the parallaxes θ1 and θ2 respectively of Moon M with respect to some distant star are determined with the help of an astronomical telescope. Thus, the total parallax of the Moon subtended on Earth ∠_AMB_ = θ1 + θ2 = θ.

If θ is measured in radians, then

θ = _AB AM_

; AM≈MC (AM is approximately

equal to MC)

θ θ

\= =_AB MC_

_MC AB_or ; Knowing the

values of AB and θ, we can calculate the distance MC of Moon from the Earth.

**Figure 1.5** Parallax method: determination of distance of Moon from Earth

MS1 S2

A B

θθ1 θ2

C

**EXAMPLE 1.2**

The Moon subtends an angle of 1° 55′ at the base line equal to the diameter of the Earth. What is the distance of the Moon from the Earth? (Radius of the Earth is 6.4 × 106 _m_)




  

**_Solution_**

angle θ = 1° 55′= 115′

\=(115 × 60)˝ × (4.85 × 10-6) rad =3.34 × 10-2 rad

since 1˝ = 4.85 × 10-6 rad

Radius of the Earth = 6.4 × 106 _m_ From the Figure 1.5, AB is the diameter of the Earth (b)= 2 × 6.4 × 106 _m_ Distance of the Moon from the Earth _x_ = ?

_x_ = _b_ θ

\= × × × -

2 6 4 10 3 34 10

6

2

. .

_x_ \= 3.83 × 108m

**RADAR method** The word RADAR stands for radio detection and ranging. A radar can be used to measure accurately the distance of a nearby planet such as Mars. In this method, radio waves are sent from transmitters which, after reflection from the planet, are detected by the receiver. By measuring, the time interval (t) between the instants the radio waves are sent and received, the distance of the planet can be determined as

Speed = distance travelled / time taken (Speed is explained in unit 2) Distance(d) = Speed of radio

waves _×_ time taken

_d v t_\= × 2

where v is the speed of the radio wave. As the time taken (t) is for the distance covered during the forward and backward path of the radio waves, it is divided by 2  

to get the actual distance of the object. This method can also be used to determine the height, at which an aeroplane flies from the ground.

**Figure 1.6** RADAR method

**EXAMPLE 1.3**

A RADAR signal is beamed towards a planet and its echo is received 7 minutes later. If the distance between the planet and the Earth is 6.3 × 1010 m. Calculate the speed of the signal?

**_Solution_**

The distance of the planet from the Earth d = 6.3 × 1010 m

Time t = 7 minutes = 7 × 60 s. the speed of signal _v_ \= ?

The speed of signal

_v d t_

_ms_\= = × × ×

\= × -2 2 6 3 10 7 60

3 10 10

8 1.






| to get the actual distance of the object. ismethod c an a lso b e u sed t o det ermine t heheight, at which an aeroplane ies from theground.Figure 1.6 RADAR method |
|------|




| EXAMPLE 1.3A R ADAR sig nal i s b eamed t owards a planet a nd i ts e cho i s r eceived 7 min utes later. I f t he di stance b etween t he p lanet and the Earth is 6.3 × 10  m. Calculate the speed of the signal?Solution 10e di stance o f t he p lanet f rom t he E arth d = 6.3 × 10  mTime t = 7 minutes = 7 × 60 s.10the speed of signal v = ?e speed of signal22d ××63. 10v == =×31 0 mst 76× 01081 - |
|------|




  

**Table 1.5** Range and Order of Lengths **Size of objects and distances** Distance to the boundary of observable universe Distance to the Andromeda galaxy Size of our galaxy Distance from Earth to the nearest star (other than the Sun) Average radius of Pluto’s orbit Distance of the Sun from the Earth Distance of Moon from the Earth Radius of the Earth Height of the Mount Everest above sea level Length of a football field Thickness of a paper Diameter of a red blood cell Wavelength of light Length of typical virus Diameter of the hydrogen atom Size of atomic nucleus Diameter of a proton

**Figure 1.7 The international** 1 kg standard of mass, a platinum-iridium (9:1) cylinder 3.9 cm in height and diameter.  

**Length (m)** 1026

1022

1021

1016

1012

1011

108

107

104

102

10−4

10−5

10−7

10−8

10−10

10−14

10−15

**Some Common Practical Units**

(i) Fermi = 1 fm = 10−15 m

(ii) 1 angstrom = 1 Å = 10−10 m

(iii) 1 nanometer = 1 nm = 10−9 m

(iv) 1 micron = 1µm = 10−6 m

(v) 1 Light year (Distance

travelled by light in vacuum

in one year) 1 Light Year =

9.467 × 1015 m

(vi) 1 astronomical unit

(the mean distance of

the Earth from the Sun)

1 AU = 1.496 × 1011 m

(vii) 1 parsec (Parallactic

second) (Distance at

which an arc of length

1 AU subtends an angle

of 1 second of arc)

1 parsec = 3.08 × 1016 m

\=3.26 light year

Why is the cylinder used in defining kilogram made up of platinum-iridium alloy?

This is because the platinum-iridium alloy is least affected by environment and time.

Chandrasekhar Limit (CSL) is the largest practical unit of mass.

1 CSL = 1.4 times the mass of the Sun

The smallest practical unit of time is Shake.

1 Shake = 10−8 s




  

## Measurement of mass


Mass is a property of matter. It does not depend on temperature, pressure and location of the body in space. _Mass of a body is defined as the quantity of matter contained in a body. The SI unit of mass is kilogram_ (kg). The masses of objects which we shall study in this course vary over a wide range. These may vary from a tiny mass of electron (9.11×10−31kg) to the huge mass of the known universe (=1055 kg). The order of masses of various objects is shown in Table 1.6.

Ordinarily, the mass of an object is determined in kilograms using a common balance like the one used in a grocery shop. For measuring larger masses like

**Table 1.6** Range of masses **Object Order of mass (kg)**

Electron 10−30

Proton or Neutron 10−27

Uranium atom 10−25

Red blood corpuscle 10−14

A cell 10−10

Dust particle 10−9

Raindrop 10−6

Mosquito 10−5

Grape 10−3

Frog 10−1

Human 102

Car 103

Ship 105

Moon 1023

Earth 1025

Sun 1030

Milky way 1041

Observable Universe 1055  

that of planets, stars etc., we make use of gravitational methods. For measurement of small masses of atomic/subatomic particles etc., we make use of a mass spectrograph.

Some of the weighing balances commonly used are common balance, spring balance, electronic balance, etc.

## Measurement of Time intervals


_“Time flows uniformly forward” – Sir Issac Newton_

_“Time is what a clock reads” – Albert Einstein_

A clock is used to measure the time interval. An atomic standard of time, is based on the periodic vibration produced in a Cesium atom. Some of the clocks developed later are electric oscillators, electronic oscillators, solar clock, quartz crystal clock, atomic clock, decay of elementary particles, radioactive dating etc. The order of time intervals are tabulated in Table 1.7.

**Figure 1.8 The atomic clock, which** keeps time on the basis of radiation from cesium atoms is accurate to about three millionths of a second per year.




  

**Table 1.7** Order of Time Intervals Event

Lifespan of the most unstable particle Time taken by light to cross a distance of nucle Period of X-rays Time period of electron in hydrogen atom Period of visible light waves Time taken by visible light to cross through a w Lifetime of an excited state of an atom Period of radio waves Time period of audible sound waves Wink of an eye Time interval between two successive heart bea Travel time of light from Moon to Earth Travel time of light from Sun to Earth Halflife time of a free neutron Time period of a satellite Time period of rotation of Earth around its axi Time period of revolution of Earth around the Average life of a human being Age of Egyptian pyramids Age of Universe

# THEORY OF ERRORS


The foundation of all experimental science and technology is measurement. The result obtained from any measurement will contain some uncertainty. Such an uncertainty is termed **_error_**_._ Any calculation made using the measured values will also have an error. It is not possible to make exact measurements in an experiment. In measurements, two different terms, accuracy and precision are used and need  

to be distinguished at this stage. Accuracy refers to how far we are from the true value, and precision refers to how well we measure.

Order of time interval (s) 10−24

ar size 10−22

10−19

10−15

10−15

indow pane 10−8

10−8

10−6

10−3

10−1

ts 100

100

102

103

104

s (one day) 105

Sun (one year) 107

109

1011

1017

In India, the National Physical Laboratory (New Delhi) has the responsibility of

maintenance and improvement of physical standards of length, mass, time, etc.




  

## Accuracy and Precision


Let us say, you know your true height is exactly 5′9″. You first measure your height with a yardstick and get the value 5′0″. Your measurement is hence not accurate. Now you measure your height with a laser yardstick and get 5′9″ as the value. Now your measurement is accurate. The true value is also called theoretical value. The level of accuracy required for each application varies greatly. Highly accurate data can be very difficult to produce and compile. For example, if you consistently measure your height as 5′0″ with a yard stick, your measurements are precise. The level of precision required for different applications vary to a great extent. Engineering projects such as road and utility construction require very precise information measured to the millimeter or one-tenth of an inch.

If a measurement is precise, that does not necessarily mean that it is accurate. However, if the measurement is consistently accurate, it is also precise.

For example, if the temperature outside a building is 40oC as measured by a weather thermometer and if the real outside

**Figure 1.9** Visual example of accuracy and pr

(a) Not accurate Not precise

(b) Not acc Precise  

temperature is 40oC, the thermometer is accurate. If the thermometer consistently registers this exact temperature in a row, the thermometer is precise.

Consider another example. Let the temperature of a refrigerator repeatedly measured by a thermometer be given as 10.4oC, 10.2oC, 10.3oC, 10.1oC, 10.2oC, 10.1oC, 10.1oC, 10.1oC. However, if the real temperature inside the refrigerator is 9oC, we say that the thermometer is not accurate (it is almost one degree off the true value), but since all the measured values are close to 10oC, hence it is precise.

**A visual example:** Target shooting is an example which explains the difference between accuracy and precision. In Figure 1.9 (a), the shots are focused so as to reach the bull’s eye (midpoint), but the arrows have reached only around this point. Hence the shots are not accurate and also not precise.

In Figure 1.9 (b), all the shots are close to each other but not at the central point. Hence the shots are said to be precise but not accurate. In Figure 1.9 (c), the shots are closer and also at the central point. Hence the shots are both precise and accurate.

ecision

urate (c) Accurate Precise




  

**A numerical example** The true value of a certain length is nearly 5.678 cm. In one experiment, using a measuring instrument of resolution 0.1 cm, the measured value is found to be 5.5 cm. In another experiment using a measuring instrument of greater resolution, say 0.01 cm, the length is found to be 5.38 cm. We find that the first measurement is more accurate as it is closer to the true value, but it has lesser precision. On the contrary, the second measurement is less accurate, but it is more precise.

## Errors in Measurement


The uncertainty in a measurement is called an error. Random error, systematic error and gross error are the three possible errors.

**i) Systematic errors** Systematic errors are reproducible inaccuracies that are consistently in the same direction. These occur often due to a problem that persists throughout the experiment. Systematic errors can be classified as follows

**1) Instrumental errors** When an instrument is not calibrated properly at the time of manufacture, instrumental errors may arise. If a measurement is made with a meter scale whose end is worn out, the result obtained will have errors. These errors can be corrected by choosing the instrument carefully.

**2) Imperfections in experimental technique or procedure** These errors arise due to the limitations in the experimental arrangement. As an example, while  

performing experiments with a calorimeter, if there is no proper insulation, there will be radiation losses. This results in errors and to overcome these, necessary correction has to be applied.

**3) Personal errors** These errors are due to individuals performing the experiment, may be due to incorrect initial setting up of the experiment or carelessness of the individual making the observation due to improper precautions.

**4) Errors due to external causes** The change in the external conditions during an experiment can cause error in measurement. For example, changes in temperature, humidity, or pressure during measurements may affect the result of the measurement.

**5) Least count error** Least count is the smallest value that can be measured by the measuring instrument, and the error due to this measurement is least count error. The instrument’s resolution hence is the cause of this error. Least count error can be reduced by using a high precision instrument for the measurement.

**ii)** **Random errors** Random errors may arise due to random and unpredictable variations in experimental conditions like pressure, temperature, voltage supply etc. Errors may also be due to personal errors by the observer who performs the experiment. Random errors are sometimes called **“chance error”. When different readings** are obtained by a person every time he




  

repeats the experiment, personal error occurs. For example, consider the case of the thickness of a wire measured using a screw gauge. The readings taken may be different for different trials. In this case, a large number of measurements are made and then the arithmetic mean is taken.

If n number of trial readings are taken in an experiment, and the readings are a1, a2, a3,…………………. an. The arithmetic mean is

_a a a a a_

_nm n_\=

\+ + +1 2 3 ............. (1.1)

or

_a n_

_am i i_

_n_

\= = ∑1

1

(1.2)

Usually this arithmetic mean is taken as the best possible true value of the quantity.

**Table 1.8** Minimizing Experimental Error Type of error Example Random error Suppose you measure the m

a ring three times using th balance and get slightly diff values. 15.46 g, 15.42 g, 15

Systematic error Suppose the cloth tape mea that you use to measure the of an object has been stretch from years of use. (As a resu the length measurements ar correct).  

Certain procedures to be followed to minimize experimental errors, along with examples are shown in Table 1.8.

**iii) Gross Error** The error caused due to the shear carelessness of an observer is called gross error. For example

(i) Reading an instrument without setting it properly.

(ii) Taking observations in a wrong manner without bothering about the sources of errors and the precautions.

(iii) Recording wrong observations.

(iv) Using wrong values of the observations in calculations.

These errors can be minimized only when an observer is careful and mentally alert.

How to minimize it ass of

e same erent

.44 g

Take more data. Random errors can be evaluated through statistical analysis and can be reduced by averaging over a large number of observations.

sure length ed out lt all of e not

Systematic errors are difficult to detect and cannot be analysed statistically, because all of the data is in the same direction. (Either too high or too low)




  

## Error Analysis


**i) Absolute Error** The magnitude of difference between the true value and the measured value of a quantity is called absolute error. If _a_1_, a_2_, a_3_, ……….a_n are the measured values of any quantity ‘_a’_ in an experiment performed _n_ times, then the arithmetic mean of these values is called the true value (_a_m) of the quantity.

_a a a a a_

_n_

_a n_

_a_

_m n_

_m i i_

_n_

\= + + + +

\= = ∑

1 2 3

1

1

.............. or

The absolute error in measured values is given by

|∆_a_1| = |_a_m – _a_1|

|∆_a_2| = |_a_m – _a_2| ……………… ……………… |∆_a_n| = |_a_m – _a_n|

**ii) Mean Absolute error** The arithmetic mean of absolute errors in all the measurements is called the mean absolute error.

∆ ∆ ∆ ∆ ∆

_a a a a a_

_nm n_\=

\+ + + +1 2 3 ...............

or = = ∑1

1_n ai_

_i_

_n_

∆

If _a_m is the true value and ∆_a_m is the mean absolute error then the magnitude of the quantity may lie between _a_m _+_ ∆_a_m and _a_m _-_ ∆_a_m  

**iii) Relative error** The ratio of the mean absolute error to the mean value is called relative error. This is also called as fractional error. Thus

Relative error =

\=

_Mean absolute error Mean value_

_a a_

_m_

_m_

∆

Relative error expresses how large the absolute error is compared to the total size of the object measured. For example, a driver’s speedometer shows that his car is travelling at 60 km h−1 when it is actually moving at 62 km h−1. Then absolute error of speedometer is 62-60 km h−1 = 2 km h−1 Relative error of the measurement is 2 km h−1 / 62 km h−1 = 0.032.

**iv) Percentage error** The relative error expressed as a percentage is called percentage error.

Percentage error = ∆_a a_

_m_

_m_

×100%

A percentage error very close to zero means one is close to the targeted value, which is good and acceptable. It is always necessary to understand whether error is due to impression of equipment used or a mistake in the experimentation.

**EXAMPLE 1.4**

In a series of successive measurements in an experiment, the readings of the period of oscillation of a simple pendulum were found to be 2.63s, 2.56 s, 2.42s, 2.71s and






| Mean absolute erro |r |
|------|------|------|
| Mean value∆am |
| am |


| aa++ aa ++..............12 3 n |or |
|------|------|
| n1n |
| ∑ani =1 |
  

2.80s. Calculate (i) the mean value of the period of oscillation (ii) the absolute error in each measurement (iii) the mean absolute error (iv) the relative error (v) the percentage error. Express the result in proper form.

**_Solution_**

_t s_1 2 63= . **,** _t s_2 2 56= . , _t s_3 2 42= . , _t s_4 2 71= . **,** _t s_5 2 80= .

(i) _T t t t t t_

_m_ \= + + + +

\= + + + +

1 2 3 4 5

5 2 63 2 56 2 42 2 71 2 80

5 . . . . .

Tm = 13 12

5 2 624. .= _s_

Tm= 2 62. _s (Rounded off to 2nd_ decimal place)

(ii) Absolute error |ΔT| = |Tm - t|

∆ ∆ ∆

_T s T s T_

1

2

3

2 62 2 63 0 01 2 62 2 56 0 06 2 62 2 42 0 2

\= - = + = - = + = - = +

. . .

. . .

. . . 0 2 62 2 71 0 09 2 62 2 80 0 18

4

5

_s T s T s_

∆ ∆

\= - = + = - = +

. . .

. . .

(iii) Mean absolute error = Σ ∆_T_

_n i_

∆_Tm_ \= + + + +0 01 0 06 0 20 0 09 0 18 5

. . . . .

∆_T s sm_ \= = =0 54 5

0 108 0 11. . . (Rounded

off to 2nd decimal place)  

(iv) Relative error:

ST = ∆_T T_

_m_

_m_

\= =0 11 2 62

0 0. .

. 419

ST = 0.04

(v) Percentage error in T = 0.04 × 100% = 4%

(vi) Time period of simple pendulum = T = (2.62 ± 0.11)s

## Propagation of errors


A number of measured quantities may be involved in the final calculation of an experiment. Different types of instruments might have been used for taking readings. Then we may have to look at the errors in measuring various quantities, collectively.

The error in the final result depends on

(i) The errors in the individual measurements

(ii) On the nature of mathematical operations performed to get the final result. So we should know the rules to combine the errors.

The various possibilities of the propagation or combination of errors in different mathematical operations are discussed below:

**(i) Error in the sum of two quantities** Let ∆A and ∆B be the absolute errors in the two quantities A and B respectively. Then,

Measured value of A = A ± ∆A Measured value of B = B ± ∆B Consider the sum, Z = A + B






| (iv) Relative error :∆T 01. 1S =  == 00.  419T 26. 2S = 0.04mT m(v) Percentage er ror in T  = 0.04 × 100% = 4%T (vi) Time p eriod o f sim ple p endulum  =T = (2.62 ± 0.11)s |
|------|




| tt ++ tt ++ t12 345 |
|------|------|------|
| 526. 32+++...56 24 22 71 + |28. 0 |
| 5.12= 2.624 s5. 2s (Rounded o to 2decimal place) |nd |
  

The error ∆Z in Z is then given by

Z ± ∆Z = (A ± ∆A) + (B ± ∆B)

\= (A + B) ± (∆A + ∆B)

\= Z ± (∆A + ∆B)

(or) ∆Z = ∆A + ∆B (1.3)

The maximum possible error in the sum of two quantities is equal to the sum of the absolute errors in the individual quantities.

**EXAMPLE 1.5**

Two resistances R1 = (100 ± 3) W, R2 = (150 ± 2) W, are connected in series. What is their equivalent resistance?

**_Solution_**

R1 = 100 ± =3 1502W; _R_ ± 2W

Equivalent resistance R = ? Equivalent resistance R = R1 2+ _R_

\= (100 ± +3 150) ( ± 2)

\= (100 + 150) ± (3 + 2)

R = (250 ± 5) W

**(ii) Error in the difference of two quantities**

Let ∆A and ∆B be the absolute errors in the two quantities, A and B, respectively. Then, Measured value of A = A ± ∆A Measured value of B = B ± ∆B Consider the difference, Z = A – B The error ∆Z in Z is then given by Z ± ∆Z = (A ± ∆A) – (B ± ∆B)  

\= (A − B) )± ∆A ± ∆B

\= Z ± ∆A ± ∆B

(or) ∆Z = ∆A + ∆B………………(1.4)

The maximum error in difference of two quantities is equal to the sum of the absolute errors in the individual quantities.

**EXAMPLE 1.6**

The temperatures of two bodies measured by a thermometer are t1 = (20 + 0.5)°C, t2 = (50 ± 0.5)°C. Calculate the temperature difference and the error therein.

**_Solution_**

t1 = (20 ± 0 5. )°C t2 = (50 ± 0 5. )°C

temperature difference t=?

t = t2 - t1 = (50 ± 0 5. ) - (20 ± 0 5. )°C

(Using equation1.4)

\= (50 – 20) ± +( . . )0 5 0 5

t = (30 ± 1)°C

**(iii) Error in the product of two quantities** Let ∆A and ∆B be the absolute errors in the two quantities A, and B, respectively. Consider the product Z = AB The error ∆Z in Z is given by Z ± ∆Z = (A ± ∆A) (B ± ∆B)

\= (AB) ± (A ∆B) ± (B ∆A) ± (∆A . ∆B)

Dividing L.H.S by Z and R.H.S by AB, we get,

1 1± = ± ± ±∆ ∆ ∆ ∆ ∆_Z Z_

_B B_

_A A_

_A A_

_B B_

.






| (or) |= (A − B) )± ∆A   ∆B= Z ± ∆A   ∆B∆Z = ∆A + ∆B………………(1.4)±± |
|------|------|------|------|


| e maximum error in dierence of two quantities is equal to the sum of the absolute errors in the individual quantities. |

  

As ∆A /A, ∆B / B are both small

quantities, their product term ∆ ∆_A A_

_B B_

.

can be neglected. The maximum

fractional error in Z is

∆ ∆ ∆_Z Z_

_A A_

_B B_

\= ± + 

 

(1.5)

The maximum fractional error in the product of two quantities is equal to the sum of the fractional errors in the individual quantities.

\[Alternative method is given in Appendix A1.2\]

**EXAMPLE 1.7**

The length and breadth of a rectangle are (5.7 ± 0 1. ) cm and (3.4 ± 0 2. ) cm respectively. Calculate the area of the rectangle with error limits.

**_Solutions_**

Length l \= (5.7 ± 0 1. ) cm

Breadth b =(3.4 ± 0 2. ) cm

Area A with error limit = A ± ∆A = ?

Area A = l × b = 5.7 × 3.4 = 19.38 = 19.4 cm2

∆ ∆ ∆

∆ ∆ ∆

_A A_

_l l_

_b b_

_A l l_

_b b_

_A_

\= +

\= +  

  

∆_A_ \= + 

 

0 1 5 7

0 2 3 4

19 4. .

.

. .

\= (0.0175+0.0588) × 19.4 = 1.48 = 1.5

Area with error limit A = (19.4±1.5) cm2  

**(iv) Error in the division or quotient of two quantities** Let ∆A and ∆B be the absolute errors in the two quantities A and B respectively.

Consider the quotient, _Z A B_

\=

The error ∆Z in Z is given by

_Z Z A A B B_

_A A A_

_B B B_

_A B_

_A A_

_B B_

± = ± ±

\= ±

  

± 

 

\= ± 

 

±

∆ ∆ ∆

∆

∆

∆ ∆

1

1

1 1 

 

\-1

or _Z Z Z A A_

_B B_

± = ± 

 

 

 

∆ ∆ ∆1 1 \[using

(1+x)n ≈1+nx, when x<<1\]

Dividing both sides by Z, we get,

1 1 1± = ± 

 

 

 

∆ ∆ ∆_Z Z_

_A A_

_B B_



\= ± ±1 ∆ ∆ ∆ ∆_A A_

_B B_

_A A_

_B B_

 .

As the terms ∆A/A and ∆B/B are small, their product term can be neglected.

The maximum fractional error in Z is

given by ∆ ∆ ∆_Z Z_

_A A_

_B B_

\= + 

 

(1.6)

The maximum fractional error in the quotient of two quantities is equal to the sum of their individual fractional errors.

(Alternative method is given in Appendix A1.2)






| ∆A |
|------|
| A∆B  |
| B B B  |


| As ∆A /A, ∆B / B a re b oth sm all ∆∆A Bquantities, their product term  .A Bcan b e n eglected.  e m aximum fractional error in Z is∆∆Z  A ∆B =±  +  (1.5)Z  A B e maximum fractional error in the product of two quantities is equal to the sum of the fractional errors in the individual quantities.[Alternative m ethod i s g iven  in Appendix A1.2] |
|------|







| (iv) Error in  the division o r q uotient of two quantitiesLet ∆A and ∆B be the absolute errors inthe two quantities A and B respectively.AConsider the quotient,  Z =Be error ∆Z in Z is given by ∆A A  1 ± AA± ∆  A ZZ±=∆ =BB± ∆  ∆B B  1 ±  B A  ∆∆A   B =±  11   ± B  A   B -1 ∆∆A   B or ZZ±=∆ Z  11±      [using  A   B (1+x)  ≈1+nx, when x<<1]Dividing both sides by Z, we get,n∆∆Z  A   ∆B 11±=  ±   1  Z  A   B ∆∆A B ∆∆A B=±1  ± .A B A BAs t he t erms ∆A/A a nd ∆B/B a re sm all, their product term can be neglected.e m axim∆∆Z um fracAtiona ∆l erB ror in Z i s =+ Z  A B given by (1.6)e maximum fractional error in the quotient of two quantities is equal to the sum of their individual fractional errors.(Alternative m ethod i s g iven in Appendix A1.2) |
|------|








  

**EXAMPLE 1.8**

The voltage across a wire is (100 ± 5)V and the current passing through it is (10±0.2) A. Find the resistance of the wire.

**_Solution_**

Voltage V = (100±5)V Current I = (10±0.2) A Resistance R = ?

Then resistance R is given by Ohm’s law,

R = _V I_

\= 100 10

10= W

∆ ∆ ∆_R R_

_V V_

_I I_

\= + 

 

∆ ∆ ∆_R V V_

_I I_

_R_\= + 

 

\= 5

100 0 2 10

10+ 

 

.

\= (0.05 + 0.02)10

\= 0.07 × 10 = 0.7

The resistance R = (10 ± 0.7)Ω

**(v) Error in the power of a quantity** Consider the nth power of A, Z = An

The error ∆Z in Z is given by

_Z Z A A A A A_

_Z n A A_

_n n n_

± = ± = ± 

 

\= ± 

 

∆ ∆ ∆

∆

( ) 1

1  

We get \[(1+x)n ≈1+nx, when x<<1\] neglecting remaining terms, Dividing both sides by Z

1 1± = ±

\=

∆ ∆

∆ ∆

_Z Z_

_n A A_

_or_

_Z Z_

_n A A_

. (1.7)

The fractional error in the nth power of a quantity is n times the fractional error in that quantity.

**General rule**: If _Z A B C_

_p q_

_r_\= Then

maximum fractional error in Z is

given by ∆ ∆ ∆ ∆_Z Z_

_p A A_

_q B B_

_r C C_

\= + +

The percentage error in Z is given by

∆ ∆ ∆

∆

_Z Z_

_p A A_

_q B B_

_r C C_

× = × + ×

\+ ×

100 100 100

100

**EXAMPLE 1.9**

A physical quantity _x i_s given by _x_ = _a b c d_

2 3

.

If the percentage errors of measurement in a, b, c and d are 4%, 2%, 3% and 1% respectively, then calculate the percentage error in the calculation of _x._ (NEET 2013)

**_Solution_**

Given _x_ = _a b c d_

2 3

The percentage error in x is given by






| We get [(1+x)  ≈1+nx, when x<<1] neglecting remaining terms, Dividing both sides by Z∆∆Zn A11±= ± n orZ A∆∆Z A= n. (1.7)Z Ae fractional error in the n  power of a quantity is n times the fractional error in that quantity.thABGeneral rule: If  Z = en Cmaximum fractional error in Z is pq∆∆Z A r ∆∆B Cgiven by  =+p q + rZ A B Ce percentage error in Z is given by∆∆Z A ∆B×=100 p ×+100 q × 100Z A B∆C+×r 100C |
|------|






|  ∆Ann |n |
|------|------|
| A  1 ± A∆A  |
| A  |
  

**1.7**

\= × = ×∆ ∆_x x_

_a a_

100 2 100 + ×

\+ × + ×

3 100

100 1 2

1

∆

∆ ∆

_b b c_

_c d_

_d_

\+ ×

\+ × + ×

3 100

100 1 2

100

∆

∆ ∆

_b b c_

_c d_

_d_

\= (2 × 4%) + (3 × 2%) + (1 × 3%) + (½ ×1%)

\= 8% +6%+3% +0.5%

The percentage error is x = 17.5%

**SIGNIFICANT FIGURES**

## Definition and Rules of Significant Figures


Suppose we ask three students to measure the length of a stick using metre scale (the least count for metre scale is 1 mm or 0.1 cm). So, the result of the measurement (length of stick) can be any of the following, 7.20 cm or 7.22 cm or 7.23 cm. Note that all the three students measured first two digits correctly (with confidence) but last digit varies from person to person. So, the number of meaningful digits is 3 which communicate both measurement (quantitative) and also the precision of the instrument used. Therefore, significant number or significant digit is 3. It is defined as the **number of meaningful digits which contain numbers that are known reliably and first uncertain number. Examples: The significant figure for the** digit 121.23 is 5, significant figure for the digit 1.2 is 2, significant figure for the digit 0.123 is 3, significant digit for 0.1230 is 4, significant digit for 0.0123 is 3, significant  

digit for 1230 is 3, significant digit for 1230 (with decimal) is 4 and significant digit for 20000000 is 1 (because 20000000=2 × 107 has only one significant digit, that is, 2).

In physical measurement, if the length of an object is l = 1230 m, then significant digit for _l_ is 4.

The rules for counting significant figures are given in Table 1.9.

**EXAMPLE 1.10**

State the number of significant figures in the following i) 600800 iv) 5213.0

ii) 400 v) 2.65 × 1024 _m_ iii) 0.007 vi) 0.0006032

**Solution:** i) four ii) one iii) one

iv) five v) three vi) four

## Rounding Off


Calculators are widely used now-a-days to do calculations. The result given by a calculator has too many figures. In no case should the result have more significant figures than the figures involved in the data used for calculation. The result of calculation with numbers containing more than one uncertain digit should be rounded off. The rules for rounding off are shown in Table 1.10.

**EXAMPLE 1.11**

Round off the following numbers as indicated

i) 18.35 up to 3 digits ii) 19.45 up to 3 digits iii) 101.55 × 106 up to 4 digits iv) 248337 up to digits 3 digits v) 12.653 up to 3 digits.

00






| ∆∆x×x+×=          = 8% +6%+3% +0.5% |a ∆b100 =×2 100 +×3 100a b∆∆c∆∆c 1 d100 +× 100c 2 d(2 × 4%) + (3 × 2%) + (1 × 3%) + (½ ×1%)centage error is x = 17.5% |1 d |
|------|------|------|------|


| e per |
  

**Table 1.9 Rules for counting significant fig Rule**

i) All non-zero digits are significant

ii) All zeros between two non zero digits are sig

iii) All zeros to the right of a non-zero digit b to the left of a decimal point are significan

iv) For the number without a decimal point, terminal or trailing zero(s) are not signific

v) If the number is less than 1, the zero (s) o right of the decimal point but to left of the non zero digit are not significant.

vi) All zeros to the right of a decimal point an to the right of non-zero digit are significa

vii) The number of significant figures does no depend on the system of units used

**Note 1:** Multiplying or dividing factors, which are neith measured values, are exact and they have infinite numb example, circumference of circle S = 2πr, Here the facto 2.000 as required. **Note 2: The power of 10 is irrelevant to the determinat** For example _x_ = 5.70 m = 5.70 × 102 cm = 5.70 × 103 m In each case the number of significant figures is three.

**Table 1.10 Rules for Rounding Off** Rule i) If the digit to be dropped is smaller than 5,

the preceding digit should be left unchang ii) If the digit to be dropped is greater than 5,

the preceding digit should be increased by iii) If the digit to be dropped is 5 followed by d

other than zero, then the preceding digit sh be raised by 1

iv) If the digit to be dropped is 5 or 5 followe zeros, then the preceding digit is not chang it is even

v) If the digit to be dropped is 5 or 5 followe zeros, then the preceding digit is raised by is odd  

ures **Example**

1342 has four significant figures

nificant 2008 has four significant figures

ut t.

30700\. has five significant figures

the ant.

30700 has three significant figures

n the first

0.00345 has three significant figures

d nt.

40.00 has four significant figures and 0.030400 has five significant figures

t 1.53 cm, 0.0153 m, 0.0000153 km, all have three significant figures

er rounded numbers nor numbers representing ers of significant figures as per the situation. For r 2 is exact number. It can be written as 2.0, 2.00 or

ion of significant figures. m = 5.70 × 10−3 km.

Example then ed.

i) 7.32 is rounded off to 7.3 ii) 8.94 is rounded off to 8.9

then 1

i) 17.26 is rounded off to 17.3 ii) 11.89 is rounded off to 11.9

igits ould

i) 7.352, on being rounded off to first decimal becomes 7.4

ii) 18.159 on being rounded off to first decimal, become 18.2

d by ed if

i) 3.45 is rounded off to 3.4 ii) 8.250 is rounded off to 8.2

d by 1 if it

i) 3.35 is rounded off to 3.4 ii) 8.350 is rounded off to 8.4




  

**_Solution_**

i) 18.4 ii) 19.4 iii) 101.6 × 106

iv) 248000 v) 12.7

## Arithmetical Operations with Significant Figures


**(i) Addition and subtraction** In addition and subtraction, the final

result should retain as many decimal places as there are in the number with the smallest number of decimal places.

**Example:**

1\. 3.1 + 1.780 + 2.046 = 6.926 Here the least number of significant digits after the decimal is one. Hence the result will be 6.9.

2\. 12.637 – 2.42 = 10.217 Here the least number of significant digits after the decimal is two. Hence the result will be 10.22

**(ii) Multiplication and Division** In multiplication or division, the final result should retain as many significant figures as there are in the original number with smallest number of significant figures.

**Example:** 1\. 1.21 × 36.72 = 44.4312 = 44.4

Here the least number of significant digits in the measured values is three. Hence the result when rounded off to three significant digits is 44.4

2\. 36.72 ÷ 1.2 = 30.6 = 31 Here the least number of significant digits in the measured values is two. Hence the result when rounded off to significant digit becomes 31.  

**1.8**

**DIMENSIONAL ANALYSIS**

## Dimension of Physical Quantities


In mechanics, we deal with the physical quantities like mass, time, length, velocity, acceleration, etc. which can be expressed in terms of three independent base quantities such as M, L and T. So, the dimension of a physical quantity can be defined as ‘any physical quantity which is expressed in terms of base quantities whose exponent (power) represents the dimension of the physical quantity’. The notation used to denote the dimension of a physical quantity is \[(physical quantity within square bracket)\]. For an example, \[length\] means dimension of length, \[area\] means dimension of area, etc. The dimension of length can be expressed in terms of base quantities as

\[length\] = M0 LT0 = L

Similarly, \[area\] = M0 L2 T0 = L2

Similarly, \[volume\] = M0 L3 T0 = L3

Note that in all the cases, the base quantity L is same but exponent (power) are different, which means dimensions are different. For a pure number, exponent of base quantity is zero. For example, consider the number 2, which has no dimension and can be expressed as

⇒\[2\]=M0 L0 T0 (dimensionless)

Let us write down the dimensions of a few more physical quantities.

Speed s = distance timetaken

s L T

LT, ⇒\[ \]= = −1

Velocity v = displacement timetaken

v L T

LT,  

⇒\[ \]= = −1




  

Note that speed is a scalar quantity and velocity is a vector quantity (scalar and vector will be discussed in Unit 2) but both of them have the same dimensional formula.

Acceleration velocity time taken

LT T

LT,  _a a_\= ⇒ \[ \] = = -

\- 1

2

Acceleration is velocity per time. Linear momentum or Momentum,

 



_p mv p MLT_\[ \]= ⇒\[ \]= −1

Force Momentum time

, 





_F ma F MLT_\= ⇒    = =−2

This is true for any kind of force. There are only four types of forces that exist in nature viz strong force, electromagnetic force, weak force and gravitational force. Further, frictional force, centripetal force, centrifugal force, all have the dimension MLT−2.

Impulse dimensio,   

_I F t I MLT_\= ⇒    = =−1

dimensionof momentum   

_I F t I MLT_\= ⇒    = =−1

Angular momentum is the moment of linear momentum (discussed in unit 5). Angular Momentum,L L



 



\= × ⇒    =

−_r p ML T_2 1

Work done, _W F d W ML T_\= ⋅ ⇒\[ \]= −

 

2 2

Kinetic energy

_KE mv KE m v_\= ⇒\[ \]= 

   

  \[ \]    

1 2

1 2

2 2

Since, number 1 2

is dimensionless,

the dimension of kinetic energy _KE m v ML T_\[ \]=\[ \]  =

−2 2 2 . Similarly, to get the dimension of potential energy, let us consider the gravitational potential energy, _PE mgh PE m g h_\= ⇒\[ \]=\[ \]\[ \]\[ \], , where, _m_ is the mass of the particle, _g_ is the acceleration due to gravity and _h_ is the height from the ground  

level. Hence, _PE m g h ML T_\[ \]=\[ \]\[ \]\[ \]= −2 2 . Thus, for any kind of energy ( such as for internal energy, total energy etc ), the dimension is

_Energy ML T_\[ \]= −2 2

The moment of force is known as torque, 







τ τ= × ⇒\[ \]= −_r F ML T_2 2 (Read the symbol τ as tau – Greek alphabet). Note that the dimension of torque and dimension of energy are identical but they are different physical quantities. Further one of them is a scalar (energy) and another one is a vector (torque). This means that the dimensionally same physical quantities need not be the same physical quantities.

1\. We may come across dimensions in different situations in physics, so we often confuse with the term

‘dimension’. For instance, we come across terms like ‘dimension of energy’, ‘motion in one dimension’ and ‘dimension of atom’. It should be kept in mind that dimension of physical quantity means expressing physical quantity in terms of exponent of the base quantity. Motion in one dimension, two dimensions and three dimensions implies that it gives dimension of space. Dimension of atom implies the size of the atom. So, simply writing dimension is meaningless. Hence, the meaning should be taken with the context we write.

2\. All the trigonometric functions like sinθ, cosθ etc. are dimensionless (θ is dimensionless), exponential function e_x_ and logarithm function _ln_ _x_ are dimensionless (_x_ must be dimensionless). Suppose we expand a function in series expansion (finite or infinite) which contain terms like, _x_o, _x_1, _x_2, . . . . then _x_ must be dimensionless quantity.

**Note**nof mom ntum




  

**Table 1.11** Dimensional Formula **Physical quantity Expression** Area (Rectangle) length × breadth Volume Area × height Density mass / volume Velocity displacement/tim Acceleration velocity / time Momentum mass × velocity Force mass × accelerat Work force × distance Power work / time Energy Work Impulse force × time Radius of gyration Distance Pressure (or) stress force / area Surface tension force / length Frequency 1 / time period Moment of Inertia mass × (distance Moment of force (or torque) force × distance Angular velocity angular displace Angular acceleration angular velocity Angular momentum linear momentu Co-efficient of Elasticity stress/strain Co-efficient of viscosity (force × distance Surface energy work / area Heat capacity heat energy / tem Charge current × time Magnetic induction force / (current Force constant force / displacem Gravitational constant \[force × (distanc Planck’s constant energy / frequen Faraday constant avogadro constan

Boltzmann constant energy / temperat  

**Dimensional formula** \[L2\] \[L3\] \[ML−3\]

e \[LT−1\] \[LT−2\] \[MLT−1\]

ion \[MLT−2\] \[ML2T−2\] \[ML2T−3\] \[ML2T−2\] \[MLT−1\] \[L\] \[ML−1T−2\] \[MT−2\] \[T−1\]

)2 \[ML2\] \[ML2T−2\]

ment / time \[T−1\] / time \[T−2\] m × distance \[ML2T−1\]

\[ML−1T−2\] ) / (area × velocity) \[ML−1T−1\]

\[MT−2\] perature \[ML2T−2K−1\]

\[AT\]

× length) \[MT−2A−1\] ent \[MT−2\] e)2\] / (mass)2 \[M−1L3T−2\] cy \[ML2T−1\] t × elementary charge \[AT mol−1\] ure \[ML2 T–2 K–1\]




  

## Dimensional Quantities, Dimensionless Quantities, Principle of Homogeneity


On the basis of dimension, we can classify quantities into four categories.

(1) **Dimensional variables** Physical quantities, which possess

dimensions and have variable values are called dimensional variables. Examples are length, velocity, and acceleration etc.

**(2) Dimensionless variables** Physical quantities which have no

dimensions, but have variable values are called dimensionless variables. Examples are specific gravity, strain, refractive index etc.

**(3) Dimensional Constant** Physical quantities which possess

dimensions and have constant values are called dimensional constants. Examples are Gravitational constant, Planck’s constant etc.

**(4) Dimensionless Constant** Quantities which have constant values

and also have no dimensions are called dimensionless constants. Examples are π, e (Euler’s number), numbers etc.

**Principle of homogeneity of dimensions** The principle of homogeneity of dimensions states that the dimensions of all the terms in a physical expression should be the same. For example, in the physical expression v2 = u2 + 2as, the dimensions of v2, u2 and 2 as are the same and equal to \[L2T−2\].  

## Application and Limitations of the Method of Dimensional Analysis.


**This method is used to** (i) Convert a physical quantity from one

system of units to another. (ii) Check the dimensional correctness of a

given physical equation. (iii) Establish relations among various

physical quantities.

**(i) To convert a physical quantity from one system of units to another**

This is based on the fact that the product of the numerical values (n) and its corresponding unit (u) is a constant. i.e, n \[u\] = constant (or) n1\[u1\] = n2\[u2\].

Consider a physical quantity which has dimension ‘_a’_ in mass, ‘_b’_ in length and ‘_c’_ in time. If the fundamental units in one system are M1, L1 and T1 and the other system are M2, L2 and T2 respectively, then we can write, n1 \[M1

a L1

b T1 c\] = n2 \[M2

a L2 b T2

c\] We have thus converted the numerical

value of physical quantity from one system of units into the other system.

**EXAMPLE 1.12**

Convert 76 cm of mercury pressure into Nm−2 using the method of dimensions.

**_Solution_**

In cgs system 76 cm of mercury pressure = 76 × 13.6 × 980 dyne cm−2

The dimensional formula of pressure P is \[ML−1T−2\]




  

_P M L T P M L Ta b c a b c_ 1 1 1 1 2 2 2 2  =  

We have _P P M M_

_L L_

_T T_

_a b c_

2 1 1

2

1

2

1

2

\= 

 



 



 



 



 



 

M1 = 1g, M2 = 1kg L1 = 1 cm, L2 = 1m T1 = 1 s, T2 = 1s

As a =1, b= -1, and c = -2

Then

_P g kg_

_cm m_

_s s_2

1 1 2

76 13 6 980 1 1

1 1

1 1

\= × × 

 



 

 

 

 

 

\- -

.

\= × × 

 



 



 



 

 

 

− − − −

76 13 6 980 10 1

10 1

1 1

3 1 2 1 2

. _kg kg_

_m m_

_s s_

\= 76 × 13.6 × 980 × \[10−3\] × 102

_P_2 = 1.01 × 105 Nm−2

**EXAMPLE 1.13**

If the value of universal gravitational constant in SI is 6.6x10−11 Nm2 kg−2, then find its value in CGS System?

**_Solution_**

Let GSI be the gravitational constant in the SI system and Gcgs in the cgs system. Then

GSI = 6.6 × -10 11Nm2 kg−2

G_cgs_ \=?

_n n M M_

_L L_

_T T_

_a b c_

2 1 1

2

1

2

1

2

\= 

 



 



 



 



 



 

G_cgs_ \= GSI _M M_

_L L_

_T T_

_a b c_

1

2

1

2

1

2



 



 



 



 



 



   

M1 = 1 kg L1 = 1m T1 = 1s

M2 = 1 g L2 = 1 cm T2 = 1s

The dimensional formula for G is M- -1 3 2_L T_

a = -1 b = 3 and c = -2

G_cgs_ \= 6.6 × -10 11 1 1

1 1

1 1

1 3 2_kg g_

_m cm_

_s s_



 



 

 

 

 

 

\- -

\= 6.6 × -10 11 1 10

1 10

1 13

1

2

3 2_kg kg_

_m m_

_s s_−

−

−

−

 



 

 

 

 

 

\= 6.6 × 10−11 × 10−3x 106 × 1

G_cgs_ \= 6.6 × 10-8 _dyne_ cm2 2_g_ \-

**(ii) To check the dimensional correctness of a given physical equation** Let us take the equation of motion v = u + at Apply dimensional formula on both sides \[LT−1\] = \[LT−1\] + \[LT−2\] \[T\]

\[LT−1\] = \[LT−1\] + \[LT−1\]

(Quantities of same dimension only can be added)

We see that the dimensions of both sides are same. Hence the equation is dimensionally correct.

**EXAMPLE 1.14**

Check the correctness of the equation 1 2

2_mv mgh_\= using dimensional analysis

method.






| PMWe haAs a =1, b= -1, aenP =×76=×762= 76 P = 1.01 2 | LT  = PM LT   M   L   T v11e  PP= ab 11  caM  22 L  22Tbc ab c1M  = 1g1 , M 1 = 1kg212 L  = 1 cm, L2 2  = 1mT  = 1 s, T  = 1snd c = -21 21 21 2 1g   1cm  13.6 × 980  1kg   1m  1 --1210 kg  10 m 13.6× 980     1kg   1m × 13.6 × 980 × [10 ] × 10−−3 1 2 −1× 10  Nm−3 2 5 −2 |1s 1s 1s 1s −2 |
|------|------|------|------|




| (ii) |MM |= 1 kg L = 1m T = 1s= 1 g L = 1 cm T = 1s1 1 1 ensional formula for G is M2 2 2a = -1 b = 3 and c = -2-- 1kg   1m   1s 6.6  ×10  1g   1cm   1s-1 32 -11kg   1m  110     10 kg  10 m  1 6.6 × 10  × 10 −1 x 10  × 321-1−3 −2= 6.6 × 10 dyne  cm g−11 −3 6ck the dimensional corre-8 22 -cgsiven physical equations t ake t he e quation o f mtly dimensional formula on bo] = [LT ] + [LT ] [T][LT ] = [LT ] + [LT ] −1 −1 −2(Quantities of same dimensioonl−1y can be adde −1 d) −1ee t hat t he dim ensions ore s ame. H ence t he e quaensionally correct. |
|------|------|------|------|
| LT13 2 |
| e dimG == 6.6 cgs ×=GTo cheof a gLet uv = u + aApp[LTWe ssides adim |
| -s s − |
| ctness otion th sides |

| n f b oth tion i s |
  

**_Solution_**

Dimensional formula for

1 2

2 1 2 2 2_mv_ \= =- -\[M\]\[LT \] \[ML T \]

Dimensional formula for

_mgh_ \= =- -\[M\]\[LT \]\[L\] \[ML T \]2 2 2

\[ML2T−2\] = \[ML2T−2\]

Both sides are dimensionally the

same, hence the equations 1 2

2_mv mgh_\= is dimensionally correct.

**(iii) To establish the relation among various physical quantities** If the physical quantity Q depends upon the quantities Q1, Q2 and Q3 ie. Q is proportional to Q1, Q2 and Q3.

Then,

Q ∝ Q1 a Q2

b Q3 c

Q = k Q1 a Q2

b Q3 c

where k is a dimensionless constant. When the dimensional formula of Q, Q1, Q2 and Q3

are substituted, then according to the principle of homogeneity, the powers of M, L, T are made equal on both sides of the equation. From this, we get the values of a, b, c

**EXAMPLE 1.15**

Obtain an expression for the time period T of a simple pendulum. The time period T depends on (i) mass ‘_m’_ of the bob (ii) length ‘_l’_ of the pendulum and (iii) acceleration due to gravity _g_ at the place where the pendulum is suspended. (Constant k = 2π) i.e **_Solution_**

_T_ ∝ _m_a _l_b _g_c

_T = km_a _l_b _g_c  

Here k is the dimensionless constant. Rewriting the above equation with dimensions

\[T1\] = \[Ma\] \[Lb\] \[LT−2\]c

\[M0L0T1\] = \[Ma Lb+c T−2c\]

Comparing the powers of M, L and T on both sides, a=0, b+c=0, -2c=1

Solving for a,b and c a = 0, b = 1/2, and c = −1/2

From the above equation T = km0 l

1/2 g−1/2

_T k g_

_k g_\=  

 

\=l

l

1 2

Experimentally k = 2π, hence _T g_\= 2π l

**Limitations of Dimensional analysis**

1\. This method gives no information about the dimensionless constants in the formula like 1, 2, ……..π, e (Euler number), etc.

2\. This method cannot decide whether the given quantity is a vector or a scalar.

3\. This method is not suitable to derive relations involving trigonometric, exponential and logarithmic functions.

4\. It cannot be applied to an equation involving more than three physical quantities.

5\. It can only check on whether a physical relation is dimensionally correct but not the correctness of the relation. For example using

dimensional analysis, s = ut + 1 3

at2 is dimensionally correct whereas the correct relation is s = ut + 1

2 at2.






| Here k i s t he dim ensionless co nstant. Rewriting t he a bove e quation w ith dimensions[T ] = [M ] [L ] [LT ][M L T ] = [M  L T ]Comparin1 g t he pa ow bers o f M, L a−2 c nd T on both sides, a=0, b+c=0, -2c=10 0 1 a b+c  −2cSolving for a,b and c a = 0, b = 1/2, a nd c = −1/2From t he a bove e quation T = k ml g1/2  −1/2 Tk=  gl  = k l g 0Experimentally k = 2π, hen12 ce T = 2π lg |
|------|






| SolutionDimensional formula for1mv ==[M][LT ][ ML T]2Dimensional formula for21 -- 22 2mgh ==[M][LT ][L][ ML T][ML T ] = [ML T ]B oth  sides  are  --22 dimensional 2ly  the 1same, h ence t h2e e−2quations  2 −2mv = mg  is2dimensionally correct.(iii) To es tablish the r elation a 2 mong various physical quantitiesIf t he p hysical q uantity Q dep ends upon t he q uantities Q , Q  an d Q ie. Q is proportional to Q , Q  and Qen, Q ∝ Q  Q  Q 1 2 3 Q = k Q  Q  Q1 2 3.where k i s a dim ensio a nlesb s coc nstant. W hen1 2 3the dimensional formua la obf Q, Q c , Q  and Qare substituted, then acco1 rdin2 g t3 o the principleof h omogeneity, t he p owers o f M, L, T a remade e qual o n b oth sides o f t he e quation.1 2 3 From this, we get the values of a, b, c |
|------|






  

„ Physics is an experimental science in whi in units.

„ All physical quantities have a magnitude

„ The SI unit of length, mass, time, tempera and luminous intensity are metre, kilo candela respectively.

„ Units of all mechanical, electrical, magn terms of these base units.

„ Screw gauge, vernier caliper methods are the case of small distances.

„ Parallax, RADAR methods are available of long distances.

„ The uncertainty in a measurement is cal is a measure of how close the measured Every accurate measurement is precise b accurate.

„ When two or more quantities are added o the least of the individual precisions. Wh the result has the same number of signific number of significant figures.

„ Dimensional analysis is used to perform Whenever the quantities are added, subtr dimension. A dimensionally correct equa true equation is necessarily dimensionall

**SUMMARY**  

ch measurements made must be expressed

(size) and a unit.

ture, electric current, amount of substance gram, second, kelvin, ampere, mole and

etic and thermal quantities are derived in

available for the measurement of length in

for the measurement of length in the case

led error. The accuracy of a measurement value is to the true value of the quantity. ut every precise measurement need not be

r subtracted, the result can be as precise as en the quantities are multiplied or divided, ant figures as the quantity with the smallest

quick check on the validity of equations. acted or equated, they must have the same tion may not be a true equation but every

y correct.




  

**CONCEP**  

**T MAP**




  

**I. Multiple Choice Questions**

**1\.** One of the combinations from the

fundamental physical constants is _hc G_

.

The unit of this expression is a) kg2 b) m 3

c) s -1 d) m **2\.** If the error in the measurement of

radius is 2%, then the error in the determination of volume of the sphere will be

a) 8% b) 2% c) 4% d) 6%

**3\.** If the length and time period of an oscillating pendulum have errors of 1% and 3% respectively then the error in measurement of acceleration due to gravity is a) 4% b) 5% c) 6% d) 7%

4\. The length of a body is measured as 3.51 m, if the accuracy is 0.01m, then the percentage error in the measurement is a) 351% b) 1% c) 0.28% d) 0.035%

**5\.** Which of the following has the highest number of significant figures? a) 0.007 m2

b) 2.64x1024 kg c) 0.0006032 m2

d) 6.3200 J  

**EVALUATION**

**6\.** If π = 3.14, then the value of π2 is a) 9.8596 b) 9.860 c) 9.86 d) 9.9

**7\.** Round of the following number 19.95 into three significant figures. a) 19.9 b) 20.0 c) 20.1 d) 19.5

**8\.** Which of the following pairs of physical quantities have same dimension? a) force and power b) torque and energy c) torque and power d) force and torque

9\. The dimensional formula of Planck's constant h is \[JEE Main, NEET\] a) \[ML2T-**1\]** b) \[ML2T-3\] c) \[MLT-**1\]** d) \[ML3T-3\]

**10\. The velocity of a particle v** at an instant t is given by _v at bt_\= + 2. The dimensions of _b_ is a) \[L\] b) \[LT-1\] c) \[LT-**2\]** d) \[LT-3\]

**11\. The dimensional formula for** gravitational constant _G_ is a) \[ML3T-**2\]** b) \[M-1L3T-2\] c) \[M-1L-3T-**2\]** d) \[ML-3T2\]




  

**12\. The density of a material in CGS system** of units is 4 g cm-3 . In a system of units in which unit of length is 10 cm and unit of mass is 100 g, then the value of density of material will be a) 0.04 b) 0.4 c) 40 d) 400

**13\.** If the force is proportional to square of velocity, then the dimension of proportionality constant is \[JEE- 2000\] a) \[MLT0\] b) \[MLT-1\] c) \[ML-2T\] d) \[ML-1T0\]

**14\. The dimension of µ** ε0 0

1 2( )− is

\[Main AIPMT 2011\] (a) length (b) time (c) velocity (d) force

**15\.** Planck’s constant (h), speed of light in vacuum (c) and Newton’s gravitational constant (G) are taken as three fundamental constants. Which of the following combinations of these has the dimension of length? \[NEET 2016 (phase II)\]

(a) _hG_

_c_ 3 2

(b) _hG_

_c_ 5 2

(c) _hc G_

(d) _Gc_

_h_ 3 2

**Answers:**

1) a 2) d 3) d 4) c 5) d 6) c 7) b 8) b 9) a 10) d 11) b 12) c 13) d 14) c 15) a  

**II. Short Answer Questions**

1\. Briefly explain the types of physical quantities.

**2\.** How will you measure the diameter of the Moon using parallax method?

**3\.** Write the rules for determining significant figures.

**4\.** What are the limitations of dimensional analysis?

**5\. Define precision and accuracy. Explain** with one example.

**III. Long Answer Questions**

**1\.** i) Explain the use of screw gauge and vernier caliper in measuring small- er distances.

ii) Write a note on triangulation method and radar method to measure larger distances.

**2.** Explain in detail the various types of errors.

**3\.** What do you mean by propagation of errors? Explain the propagation of errors in addition and multiplication.

**4\.** Write short notes on the following. a) Unit b) Rounding - off c) Dimensionless quantities

**5\.** Explain the principle of homogeneity of dimensions. Give example.

**IV. Exercises 1.** In a submarine equipped with sonar,

the time delay between the generation of a pulse and its echo after reflection from an enemy submarine is observed to be 80 s. If the speed of sound in water is 1460 _ms_\-1. What is the distance of enemy submarine? Ans: (58.40 km)




  

**BOOKS FOR REFERENCE**

1\. Karen Cummings, Priscilla Laws, Edward R Physics, Wiley India Pvt LTd, 2nd Edition 20

2\. Sears and Zemansky’s, College Physics, Pear

3\. Halliday. D and Resnick.R, Physics. Part-I, W

4\. Sanjay Moreshwar Wagh and Dilip Abasahe PHI learning Pvt Ltd, New Delhi. 2013.

5\. James S. Walker , Physics, Addison-Wesley P

**2\. The radius of the circle is 3.12 m.** Calculate the area of the circle with regard to significant figures. Ans: (30.6 m2)

**3\.** Assuming that the frequency γ of a vibrating string may depend upon i) applied force (F) ii) length (l) iii) mass

per unit length (m), prove that _ga_ 1 _l_

_F m_

using dimensional analysis. (related to JIPMER 2001)  

edish, Patrick Cooney, Understanding 07.

son Educatoin Ltd,10th Edition, 2016.

iley Easter, New Delhi

b Deshpande, Essentials of Physics Volume I,

ublishers, 4th Edition

**4\.** Jupiter is at a distance of 824.7 million km from the Earth. Its angular diameter is measured to be 35.72˝. Calculate the diameter of Jupiter. Ans: (1.428 × 105 km)

**5\. The measurement value of length of** a simple pendulum is 20 cm known with 2 mm accuracy. The time for 50 oscillations was measured to be 40 s within 1 s resolution. Calculate the percentage accuracy in the determination of acceleration due to gravity ‘g’ from the above measurement. Ans: (6%)




  

**Screw Gauge and**

Measure with

**Screw Gauge stimulation URL:** https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.

**Vernier caliper stimulation URL:** http://iwant2study.org/ospsg/index.php/interactive measurements/5-vernier-caliper#faqnoanchor

**ICT CORNER**

**STEPS:** • Get into/Access the application with the help

of the link given below or the given QR code. • To measure the given object’s diameter /

thickness, place the object as it should be fitted between the screw and anvil. The object can be fitted properly by adjusting the screw.

• After clicking the Answer button, You will get a box showing Your Measurement Result. Input your measured value in it and click Submit button. There you can verify your measurement if it is right or wrong.

• You can measure the diameter of various objects by clicking Next button.

\* Pictures are indicative only. \* If browser requires, allow **Flash Player** or **Java S**

load the page.

**Step4Step3**

**Step2Step1**  

**Vernier Caliper**

Pleasure

priantos.screwgaugegames&hl=en

\-resources/physics/01-

**STEPS:** • Use the given URL to access ‘Vernier Caliper’

simulation page. Click ‘Play Button’ to launch the simulation.

• Select the unit and set the ‘Zero Error’ from the dropdown above the scale.

• Click and drag the secondary scale and place the blue coloured object in between them. Find the measurement and enter it in the answer box above the scale.

• Change the size of the object by clicking and dragging the edge of the blue object and practice the measurement using Vernier Caliper.

**cript** to

**Step4Step3**

**Step2Step1**




